---
title: "Plato's Philosopher Rulers"
subtitle: "A Textual Analysis of a Section from Plato's Republic"
date: 2022-12-27T15:30:43Z
draft: false
---
This section can be interpreted as another critique of democracy and a justification of Socrates’ idea to have philosopher-rulers in the perfect city. Echoing events in Plato’s life, such as the political upheaval in Athens and the execution of Socrates. This part critiques the alternatives to the perfect system of aristocracy. It also refers to Plato’s beliefs in the relationship between the soul and politics^1^. The books surrounding this section also contain anti-democratic and autobiographical themes; the cave story resembles Socrates’ execution; the other political systems reinforce Plato’s argument about aristocracies’ perfection; and how tyranny arises from democracy.

The democratic man is one who “lives … indulging [in] the pleasure of the moment” (Plato, 2007: 561c). He is one who lives based on his whims. This resembles Plato’s view of democracy as very individualistic. He alludes to this again when he writes that, “There’s no order or restraint in his life,” (Plato, 2007: 561d). Throughout book VIII, Plato describes both the types of regimes and the kinds of souls of its inhabitants; again embodying Plato’s belief that the soul and politics are bound together (Tagney, 2022b). Therefore, the rulers and the political systems can be taken as forming one whole. Consequently, when Plato is critiquing the democratic man as lacking “order or restraint” (Plato, 2007: 561d), it could be seen as meaning that a democratic system is ruled by the same principles.

Although the description of the democratic man can be taken as a standalone critique of the democratic system, or a reflection of Plato’s belief in the relationship of soul and politics, elements of Plato’s life can be linked to his ideas about the ideal political system, and why democracy is not that. Throughout Plato’s life, Athens faced numerous changes to its political system: starting off with an oligarchic coup; a democratic counter-revolution; the thirty tyrants military oligarchy; and another democracy which executed Socrates (Tagney, 2022a). This political upheaval can be seen in the individualism portrayed by the democratic man. Unsurprisingly, the execution of Socrates is often reflected in the dialogue, for example, through the democratic man’s carelessness, or through the allegorical cave story. Plato writes that the democratic man “Often … takes to politics and keeps jumping to his feet and saying or doing whatever comes into his head” (Plato, 2007: 561d). This allusion to democracy enabling excessive freedom is again mentioned in the description of a tyrannical system. However here, the democratic man could be seen as a reference to the institution that convicted Socrates because of their dismissal of someone teaching people to question the status quo. An even more overt reference to Socrates’ execution can be found in the cave story. Although after its conclusion, the allegory is used by Plato to explain why the children of the perfect city should be raised from birth to reveal their natural excellences (areté), it can also be inferred that the threat the enlightened prisoner faces when returning to the cave, to try and educate those left, is like that which Socrates faced when debating with the youth of Athens. Plato argues that, wouldn’t the prisoners say, “if anyone tried to release them and lead them up, they would kill him” (Plato, 2007: 517a).

The description of tyranny, from 562a, can’t be considered in isolation. The origin of tyranny lies within the issue of excessive liberty in a democracy. Plato compares tyranny to oligarchy; oligarchy is created because of its leaders’ “excessive desire for wealth,” (Plato, 2007: 562b). Plato then suggests that democracy also has a fatal objective, an excessive desire for “Liberty” (Plato, 2007: 562b). Initially, Plato argues that this suits “a man of free spirit” very well (Plato, 2007: 562b). However, the issue with this arises when it is pursued “at the expense of everything else” (Plato, 2007: 562c), suggesting that human greed and a lack of empathy is the issue that leads democracy towards tyranny. This argument is particularly strong when one refers to Book V, Plato says that “all who are born during the period when their mothers and fathers were producing children will call each other brothers and sisters….” (Plato, 2007: 461d). Although here Plato was explaining how children could distinguish their siblings born as a result of the same procreation festival, the community spirit generated by parts of a generation calling each other brothers and sisters can be seen as a solution to the individualistic nature of democracy and the selfish nature of the tyranny. If most of the population saw itself as a family, then it could be assumed that a greater level of empathy could be achieved. This would, in-turn, make it more difficult for any form of leadership, apart from an aristocracy, to develop since it is assumed that a family wouldn’t make decisions that would harm itself. Again, the description of tyranny is linked in Plato’s argument to the description of the democratic man; the two political systems cannot be considered on their own. This echoes Plato’s belief in the relationship of soul and politics. Alongside this, exploring both the system and the individual, strengthens Plato’s, argument as it shows that the idea of having philosopher-rulers, explained in Books III-VII, is ideal. The philosopher-rulers would not have any possessions of monetary value, eliminating the possibility of turning the aristocracy into an oligarchy; familial ties would prevent the individualistic nature of democracies; and by extension the selfishness of tyranny. Therefore, the presentation of various political organizations throughout Book VIII, and the start of Book IX, serves as a justification for the decision to assign philosophers as rulers of the ideal city.

To conclude, Plato reinforces the case for why an aristocracy ruled by philosophers is ideal and why democracy is not much better than tyranny. The influence of Plato’s life on his ideas is evident in his allusions to Socrates’ execution through his dislike of democracies, but also through the cave allegory. Much of the last few books of the dialogue serve as a reinforcement to Plato’s argument for philosopher-rulers; they wouldn’t lust for material possessions; they wouldn’t make selfish decisions; and they would be ruled by reason; all ways to create an aristocracy.
 
^1^The relationship of the soul and politics refers to the idea of a tripartite soul (Brown, 2017) and that a person who is dominated by anything but rationale, will be unable to be an aristocratic ruler.

Bibliography

Brown, E. (2017). Plato’s Ethics and Politics in The Republic. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 02/11/2022 from https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato-ethics-politics/

Plato. (2007). The Republic (D. Lee, Trans.; Second ed.). Penguin Books.

Tagney, J. (2022a). Plato Against Politics as Usual [Lecture Slides]. https://vle.exeter.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/2928725/mod_resource/content/2/Lecture%204%20slides.pdf

Tagney, J. (2022b). Plato’s Republic – Division of the text and content of the dialogue. https://vle.exeter.ac.uk/pluginfile.php/3162034/mod_resource/content/3Plato%E2%80%99s%20Republic%20%E2%80%93%20DIVISIONS%20AND%20CONTENTS.pdf